This is Tuesday, August 18, 1987. I'm Bob Cornish,
and I'm in the office of Kent Butler. Kent is
currently on leave from the University of Texas
Department of Urban Planning. community and
regional planning, that is, with the Lower
Colorado River Authority. And Kent, let's take a
look first of all at what you were doing when you
were on the UT planning faculty. I'd like to ask you
first what you did to be eligible to join the
faculty. What was your background academically,
and where did you do this sort of thing, and where
did you, where were you located before coming to UT
and so forth? Okay, well, my first college
training was at Penn, University of
Pennsylvania, and I got turned on to planning
and... When were you there? In the late 60s and
early 70s, actually just two years, 69 through 71.
I see. That was about three or four years after I was
there. Oh, okay. Well, I was there at the vertex of
the environmental movement. Earth Day, original
Earth Day, 1970, was right in the middle of my first
college experience. Well, that must have made
quite an impression on you as a student, then, in
planning. Well, I started out in the Wharton
School of Finance, and I quickly got dismayed by
the gray flannel suits and the piqued interest of
all of my student colleagues in marketing theory
and things that had no sense of social importance
to me. At the same time, the city was alive with
environmental concerns. And the most outspoken
person that I could get to was Ian McCarg. And his
program was in its heyday of teaching the whole
concept of design with nature as people talk about
it today. So I took a course from McCarg and started
the first undergraduate degree program in
landscape architecture and regional planning at
Penn. A combined degree? Yes, it was an
individualized major at the undergraduate
level, and there were no undergraduate degrees
there. But I quickly got frustrated by the fact
that that was an exceptional graduate school with
little to offer in terms of undergraduate
coursework. So as much as I was turned on to the
program there I had to leave in order to get proper
scientific training if I was to follow my
instincts and become an environmental planner.
So I transferred to the Institute for
Environmental Studies at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. And there I stayed for seven
years. I got a bachelor's degree in environmental
science, a master's degree in water resources
management, and a PhD in land resources. All those
degrees were multidisciplinary,
interdepartmental in nature. And I was able to
develop
a scientifically based degree in resources
management and planning. I should think so.
Pretty strong academic background for The work
you're doing right now, for example. Yeah. I was
training myself to be working in the area of water
resources, coastal land management. I know
you've had a lot of interest in that, California
days and so on. But no, I don't have the background,
academic background in it that you have. And my
advisor was took a leave of absence while I was
working on my PhD and became the state planner, the
director of planning and energy for Wisconsin.
Being a progressive state to begin with, I was able
to get employment for two of the years I was in
school with the state planning and energy office.
I worked on the Wisconsin coastal program. So I had
some kind of experience in Madison. In Madison,
yes. Convenient. Yeah. So I had just a dabbling of
the practical public sector planning experience
as well as my academic work, and I was also able to
work on some large-scale research projects,
complete some research, and actually as a sort of a
post-doctoral experience, I directed a research
project on the use of science and technology
information in the governor's office,
scientific and technological research.
advisory roles of the various cabinet agencies
advising the governor in Wisconsin, how it works
from a decision-making process point of view. So
at the end of that experience, I decided to go back
to academia so that I could continue research and
begin teaching. But I had little teaching
experience before that. But you knew you wanted to
teach. Yes, teach and do research in a very applied
sense. And I sought positions. I had two or three
offers. But having grown up in Houston, having all
my family and my wife's family in Houston, and
always having a fond regard for Austin, A job that
opened up there that had tremendous flexibility
and growth potential was a certain combination
that I thought was the right thing for me at the
time. So there I went in 78 and stayed through 86 and
now I'm at LCRA. Okay. When you were at UT, What
courses were you responsible for? Well I ran, I
headed up the environmental planning curriculum
and in that area I taught courses in techniques of
environmental analysis, which you might say are
the physical planning techniques as well as
environmental analysis techniques. I taught
seminars, research seminars in environmental
policy, environmental legislation.
I taught specialized courses such as coastal zone
management and water resources management. And
then I also taught planning methods, which was a
combination of physical planning and the various
social science analysis techniques that
planners use in terms of making population
projections and economic based analysis and the
like. I think Sandy does that sometimes, doesn't
she? Yeah. In fact, in the last couple of years that
I was teaching that course, Sandy and I would
co-teach the course. We'd actually split the
program into smaller classes so that we would
teach two classes at a time so that we'd have a more
close working relationship with the students to
make it more of a hands-on experience. I did a lot of
research. I think from the second semester I was
there until the last semester, over seven years, I
had funded research consistently throughout
that period. And I felt lucky to be as successful as
I was to have ongoing contract monies that allowed
me to work in the summer, to engage a lot of
students, to keep my my time focused on some
current topical issues. Most of the research was
in the area of either coastal zone management or
water resources management. But in the last
couple of years I was there, I was more involved in
urban growth management. I spent a lot of time.
Well, you wrote an article for Hunting Magazine on
growth management in Austin, as I recall. Yeah, in
ADA General. In the journal? Yeah. That article
had to do with negotiated growth management,
which is getting into the area of negotiation and
mediation, development agreements, an area
which I had some opportunities to do some
practical work as well. I just saw, before I got
here, you opened Dick Lilly, as I was getting out of
my car, and we stopped and chatted. Just
coincidentally? Of course, he's looking for
things to do now that Barnes Connolly had gone
bankrupt.
Did he tell you that he used to teach a
comprehensive planning course once a year? I knew
that. Three or four years. And when I thought about
it, I remembered what I asked him when he was a guest
speaker at my class in comprehensive planning at
A&M. I asked him when Austin was going to come up
with a comprehensive plan. And he looked at me very
seriously and said, I'm not sure we could ever do
one. And I subsequently had reason to believe him
after seeing the Austin Tomorrow Plan. You know,
it's funny how things work. His course always came
down in the last six weeks on a studio project which
addressed prototypical, comprehensively
planned, very large-scale development in
southwest Austin. And when he left the city, he
went to work for Barnes Connolly to essentially
manage the development of the Uplands Project,
which was a four and a half thousand acre project in
southwest Austin. Interesting.
Looking back from your perspective now here at the
River Authority toward the UT Planning Program,
how would you characterize it?
Well, the program has a very energetic faculty and
has been able to maintain a very a stable size and
high quality student body.
It's always been a program that reached out to the
other departments on the campus, trying whenever
possible to complement its teaching
capabilities with other departmental
capabilities and giving a lot of flexibility to
students to tailor programs
to their desires and building upon their prior
experiences.
The thrust of the program, I think, has been
primarily in the area of policy planning with a
strong quantitative methods requirement. I
compare it to the A&M planning program, which
relative to the main thrust of the UT planning
program is perhaps known more so for its physical
planning capabilities. But that's not to say that
one is solely strong in one and the other in the
other. I think that's one distinction that I've
often heard made, and I think there's some truth to
it. But the program has always been, I
guess you'd say, lean and mean compared to the
other larger planning programs throughout the
country, which have higher faculty to student
ratios, more faculty.
I think the faculty have always
distinguished themselves from the architecture
school within which it resides by having a very
active and important research program. I think
that, as is always the case, there's two or three
faculty that really make that happen. Sandy is
certainly the leader in terms of bringing in some
significant research. Pat Wilson has been very
active in research, and I was too. I think we
probably represented,
and then when Del Myers was there, he did too. But
counting those of us that I just mentioned, we
probably represented 90% of the the active,
funded research. But that was always considered
an important part of the academic program. Either
by employment or by informal means, such as
running a research seminar, we brought that
research into the classroom. And again, a lot of
that was policy planning, applied policy
analysis. as opposed to physical planning.
I did my share and Peter Coleman did some share of
physical planning practicums, workshops, under
contract with local governments in the state. We
did, I guess, in the seven years I was there, we
probably did six or seven of those types of
physical planning projects. And they were
generally quite successful, but I don't think
those were our strengths. I think those were
essential complements in an overall planning
program.
what um one more thing i think the program has
always at least up until the last year or two
maintained a very special and essential
relationship with the city of austin through a
combination of informal linkages and formal
linkages to allow the students to take advantage
of the wonderful laboratory that Austin
represents. At one time, when I was running the
intern program, we had as many as 17 interns
working at the City of Austin at one time, and other
interns were working in other places, but that
just is an example of the level of commitment back
and forth that was made to make Austin the planning
lab for the program, and for the program to be a
research arm of the city of Austin. Has that
changed recently? Well, it's changed quite a bit
because of the economy in the 1986 and 87. The
employment capabilities of the city have gotten
negative, as have very many cities, so that
program is still working, but in large part it's
interns on a voluntary basis, or a nominal
remuneration basis. Whereas it used to be that the
interns were paid more than the graduate research
assistants. And so we inadvertently did so well
that we lost some of our better students in terms of
their research potential to the intern program.
But the city also, through the informal context,
primarily through Terry Kahn and myself, and Dal
Myers when he was there, used the university
planning program as a research arm extensively,
serving on boards and commissions, advising city
council members on long-term planning issues,
Just maintaining that informal, peer-level
dialogue with the planning professionals and the
sovereign body of the city was something we always
were very proud of and spent a lot of time doing.
Kent, we're now going to switch subjects, and this
will not be under planning education for the
transcriber. This will be under various cities
that you've been working with in the recent past.
Okay, let me get into this through sort of an
autobiographical storytelling.
Having a background in water resources, I was
taken with a monograph or a book that was written
about ten years ago by three guys from Harvard, and
the book is was fairly popular at the time, and it's
called Land Use and the Pipe. And a sewer by any
other name, you may say. And essentially the
thrust of that book and the thrust of the story it
was telling along the lines of
the role of infrastructure in urban planning, is
that notwithstanding roads, sewer and water
lines are the veins and arteries of urban growth
and suburban development. And to that extent, I
took a particular interest in the planning
dimensions of infrastructure, particularly
water and wastewater systems. and I had just
enough training to be able to really be conversant
with the civil engineering profession and enough
background in finance to understand a little of
the financial dimensions of financing
infrastructure. And through voluntary work in
the city of Austin, I helped organize the city's
Water and Wastewater Commission, which is an
advisory body with some sovereign powers on which
I served for four years. And that commission
reviewed virtually every water and wastewater
approach line that was connected to the city. And
more importantly, along the lines of the
practical planning work that I've done as a
consultant, I reviewed and was involved in the
decision making on the creation of muds.
municipal utility districts in the Austin
jurisdiction. In fact, while serving on that
commission, I reviewed and was very heavily
involved in the decisions to approve or deny some
23 muds in the Austin area. And I was involved to the
extent that council members would ask me to join
them in the final early morning negotiation
meetings with the mud developers and engineers
and attorneys on the day of the council meeting
when the consent agreement would be finally moved
and adopted, which would then authorize the mud to
be created and the city to engage in joint
participation in some of the infrastructure. And
to give you the scale of the significance of this,
one project that I was involved in included $67
million worth of water and wastewater
improvements. One particular mud. All told,
there were over $800 million worth of water and
wastewater improvements approved by the city
that would be tied into the city utility as part of
the build-out of these mud developments. And I
learned a lot about the legal and institutional
and financial dimensions of municipal utility
districts and their role vis-a-vis cities. This
was about the time that the Austin Tomorrow Plan
was being formulated, wasn't it? Well, it really
came out on the coattails of that. I became
involved in this in 1980, and the Austin Tomorrow
Plan was approved in 1980, finally approved in
1980. And these muds were in response to a lot of the
decisions by the city not to extend utility lines,
not to allow the pipe to determine where the city
would grow. And as a result, the city began to grow
by a process of negotiated growth management. And
that's the story I try to tell in that article in the
APA journal. As a result of that experience, I was
asked to help other cities in the same regard. The
runaway story of muds in Houston was being played
out again in Austin. And it was beginning to happen
in other cities as well. The first city that I was
asked to help in a position of negotiating the
decision to approve or deny and if to approve under
what terms to approve MUDS was in Missouri City.
And Missouri City is an interesting city because
it is in many ways the epitome of Houston. And I
mention that because of your research on Houston.
Missouri City, not only because of the parkland
dedication decisions is famous, is also famous
because of the role of municipal utility
districts. The city has no water utility. The city
has no wastewater utility. But it has some 35,000
people. It has 19 LUDs within the city limits of
Missouri City. As a result, they They have an
extremely inefficient and expensive
infrastructure. The planning director called me
one day and asked me to... Who was that? Wayne...
Snyder. No. Newman. Newman. Yeah, he's a former
student of mine. Yeah. Yeah, he was. And he...
Well, the city had just received the final report
of a comprehensive engineering analysis of how
could the city begin to consolidate all of these
independent utilities. And the report suggested
that they begin to dissolve the muds within the
middle of the city and to take over the debt and
begin to put them together into a centralized
utility system. Who made that report, do you know?
Yeah. Outside consulting firm? Outside
engineering consulting firm. All right. very
well-known firm in Houston. It was Pate
Engineers, Jerry Pate and Associates. I see. At
any rate, they asked me to look at it because of my
knowledge about muds and the decision-making
that go into mud approvals and the like. And I
looked at the report and I came to an interesting
conclusion. And I told them that I really felt that
they needed to understand my conclusion in some
detail because it didn't make sense to them at
first. My suggestion was that they not dissolve
any muds within the city, but rather begin
negotiating with any new muds on the fringe of the
city to begin to tie them into a regional system.
And the thrust there is that planning activity
generally occurs where growth is occurring at the
fringe, and the degree to which investment
capital can be marshalled and directed to be of
benefit to the public at large as well as the
entrepreneur, then the spirit of a
public-private partnership can be had. And
literally within a week of my making a series of
recommendations along those lines, Along came
four new mud applications in the city. And to make a
long story short, I was hired by the city to review
and negotiate the approval of those four new muds
to create a city utility which would allow those
muds to be created but which would require the
water and wastewater improvements to be
constructed by those muds to be dedicated to the
city. for ownership and operation with
appropriate financial transactions to make it
beneficial for the mud developers. And so I began
working with the city over a period of just three
months to develop consent agreements the four new
muds representing a tremendous amount of
development on the fringe of the city that were
strategically located to put in a regional
wastewater plant that would, over the course of
years, be able to take over the operation of all the
other muds inside the heart of the city. And I think
that is an example of
regional utilities infrastructure planning
that makes sense economically that an engineer
may not normally come to the same conclusion and
that deals directly with what houston is having to
face and i literally just coincidentally happen
to have a article written by some members of
houston mud boards on their concept of
regionalization, which is exactly what we're
talking about. Here's a series of seven muds on
this figure I'm showing you that all decided to tie
together. And another example of three or four
muds that decided to put in a regional plant and
take advantage of the economy of scale. Nothing
unusual for planters to think that way and look at a
larger area-wide issue, What is surprising to me
now in the Puget Sound area is that it's the public
that is demanding economies and government, and
they are insisting in regionalization and the
dissolution of local units of government. It's
front page stuff in the Seattle paper. Large
feature articles on it frequently now. It's
continuing pressure. Well, the unique character
of this particular planning experience, I think,
was the combination of the infrastructure
planning and the multi-jurisdictional element,
coupled with the need to develop, to utilize
negotiation skills. Someone who understood and
had the respect of both sides, the city and the
engineers and the developers and the financial
advisors. and who could see the benefits for both
sides of a negotiated solution. Later, I was hired
by the city of San Marcos, which is in the Austin
metropolitan district area, to do the same thing,
to review two mud applications and to serve as
negotiator for the city to allow those muds to be
created but to create an expanded city-owned and
operated utility. And after an arduous task of six
months in length, four months were in fact created
with the approval of the city to create a new
regional wastewater and water system on the
northern side of San Marcos back towards Austin.
It was a $42 million
package of agreements which, although it's not a
lot of money by the scale of a metropolitan
community, was a vast sum of money for a town of
35,000 people.
And along the same lines, I was almost immediately
after that asked to help the city of McKinney,
which is in the Dallas metro area. Actually in,
I forget the county.
It's not Dallas County, it's the next county up.
Anyway, the city of McKinney was not just
approached, but woke up one morning reading in the
newspapers that while each Ross Perot had
proclaimed victory in advance of having
purchased the Flying M Ranch, six and a half
thousand acre ranch just north of Dallas, just on
the outskirts of McKinney, right in the area of
Sherman and the future Saturn plant.
While H. Ruff slept that night, Gibraltar Savings
at 11 p.m. consummated a purchase of the Flying M
Ranch for something like $175 million cash. and
had assembled a team of planners and attorneys and
landscape architects representing some 30
professionals to carry this project to
completion and to work with